more trucks have been allowed through
the rougher Crossing into the southern
part of the Gaza Strip but the
government in Gaza says that the total
allowed in during the last 17 days 17
days that amounts to
522 that's equal to the number that
usually enters Gaza in a single day
before hamas's attacks on October the
7th the government has also announced
that all bakeries in the north of the
territory have also been forced to stop
operating well we can now speak to
Bushra khi she's the policy lead for
Oxfam in the pal inan territories in
Israel she joins me now from rala Bush
we just starting with this food
situation and orx famam has said that
starvation is being used right now as a
weapon of War now that we're hearing
that bakeries in the north are no longer
operational where are people getting any
sustenance at the
moment um so people in the north and in
Gaza City are either queuing with um to
like people are are baking bread in
their own homes if they have flower uh
but we also know that um flower supplies
are dwindling we also know that Aid is
not being distributed in Gaza City or in
the north so even though that Aid so
little not enough only two it represents
only 2% of food deliveries that would
have been carried out before 7th of
October um is not reaching um affected
communities in Gaza City and in the
north and we're talking about almost
half a million
if not more uh people still in the north
and Gaza City so people are hungry sorry
just to to check in with you there was
any of that Aid actually ever destined
for the north Israel had been quite
explicit about wanting that Aid to to be
really only for the the South and
Central part of the
strip the north has been completely
sealed off um from the south so the aid
is not reaching the north I think except
for some medical supplies that got in
last week um to some of the hospitals in
the in the north but I mean again not
enough the needs now are even greater
than what they were before the 7th of
October so if we needed 500 trucks a day
um before the 7th of October we need
much more um to be able to meet the
daily needs of 2.2 million people um and
half of which are children um people are
hungry um and hunger has become a norm
uh in Gaza and this is my family's
testimonies uh uh they're you know they
just eat very small meals one a meal a
day at best um with you know a lot of
people are also Ready for War because
this is the sixth escalation they have
so people usually have you know lentils
and rice and flour at home but again the
problem is is the water the water is
dirty so they're also cooking with dirty
water if they are
cooking um bush in terms of obviously
fuel has been a huge issue here
especially in terms of of being able to
produce clean water even being able to
bake bread at home but also to to move
around you talked about the northern
part of the Gaza Strip being now
basically completely cut off are people
able to leave if they want to especially
given the lack of fuel and the presence
of Israeli troops there on the
ground well I mean the Israelis have
given windows for people to leave from
the north to the South and have asked
for all residents of the north and Gaza
City to evacuate towards the South the
problem is is that these um orders have
often been um not on true but but
they're not safe uh these are not safe
boots we know that these boots have been
bombed we know that civilians were
killed while trying to evacuate to the
South so people don't trust those orders
anymore it's causing so much panic and
Chaos um people are having to make these
difficult decisions and also people like
my family they're elderly they can't
walk to the South it's not feasible um
for them to actually evacuate by foot um
with no belongings they're not allowed
to take any money they're not allowed to
take anything um when in their
evacuation so a lot of people are
choosing to stay um because it's not
safe um and they don't know where to go
um bush in terms of of the displacement
we've we've now understood that
something like 70% of people have lost
their homes what are their options now
and and I'm asking I guess is there a
growing design to leave the Gaza Strip
despite what we're hearing from
politicians about Force displacement and
red lines are people now in such
desperate situations they just want to
go I mean they're being forced to go
they don't they're not choosing to go
they're being forced to go because
they're being starved and they're
thirsty and they need shelter yeah um
but there's nowhere to go to because ra
has closed and Israeli borders are
closed and this is the responsibility of
Israel as the occupier to ensure that it
protects civilian population in Gaza and
it's not because it's chosen to do the
opposite by cutting off water
electricity fuel medical supplies
bombarding indiscriminately hospitals
ambulances and necessary civilian
infrastructure um so people are I mean
people some people don't have the choice
like I'm saying some of my family they
don't have the choice to evacuate
because they don't know where to go to
places are overcrowded there's a wash
sanitation crisis now developing um why
is my my father-in-law being forced to
go to an overcrowded situation that is
probably unsafe anyway he'd rather stay
at home and and he said to die in
dignity in my own home rather die than
die in some strangers home Bush there
the policy lead for Oxfam in the
Palestinian territories in Israel busha
thank you for joining us on Al jazer and
I'm sorry to hear that your family is
stuck at the moment in Gaza we we wish
that they that they do remain safe thank
you for your
time yeah